README.md, before:

# Welcome!
Code accompanying our project on "Identifcation of phenotypic switching of colorectal tumour buds in response to tumour-microenvironment using spatially resolved transcriptomics", abstract available [here](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00292-023-01249-7).

#### Overview
This repo contains code for all analysis steps, from gene counts to pathway enrichment analyses and spatial deconvolution. 
The data processing steps were handled by Nanostring's `GeoMx NGS pipeline v2.3.3.10`.

<img src="./Master_files/Workflow_Fig.png" alt="drawing" width="650"/>

#### Profile matrices
We built custom cell profile matrices from colorectal cancer single-cell data for the deconvolution tasks. The data is freely accessible from [Pelka & al](https://www.cell.com/cell/fulltext/S0092-8674(20)30870-9)'s article "Coordinated Cellular Neighborhoods Orchestrate Antitumoral Immunity at the Colorectal Cancer Invasive Front".
Two matrices are available: the "top" matrix groups together similar cell types, and the "mid" categories are a bit more detailed. Short descriptions for the cell type names are available [here](./Master_files/name_mapping.xlsx).

#### DGE, GSEA and deconvolution

Commit message:

docs: Updated README, missing the env files

README.md, after:

# Welcome!
Code accompanying our project on "Identifcation of phenotypic switching of colorectal tumour buds in response to tumour-microenvironment using spatially resolved transcriptomics", abstract available [here](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00292-023-01249-7).

### Overview
This repo contains code for all analysis steps, from gene counts to pathway enrichment analyses and spatial deconvolution. 
The data processing steps were handled by Nanostring's `GeoMx NGS pipeline v2.3.3.10`.

<img src="./Master_files/Workflow_Fig.png" alt="drawing" width="650"/>

### Profile matrices
We built custom cell profile matrices from colorectal cancer single-cell data for the deconvolution tasks. The data is freely accessible from Pelka & al.'s [article](https://www.cell.com/cell/fulltext/S0092-8674(20)30870-9) "Coordinated Cellular Neighborhoods Orchestrate Antitumoral Immunity at the Colorectal Cancer Invasive Front".
Two matrices are available in `./Master_files`: the "top" matrix groups together similar cell types, and the "mid" categories are a bit more detailed. Short descriptions for the cell type names are available [here](./Master_files/name_mapping.xlsx).

### DGE, GSEA and Deconvolution
#### R environment/dependencies

#### R scripts
Quality control of the data processing results is done using script [0](./Scripts/0_DSPQC_FILTERING.R). The data exploration steps (PCA, GSVA) are covered in script [1](./Scripts/1_TB_QCGSVA.R). Details on the differential gene expression, GSEA and ORA can be found in script [2](./Scripts/2A_TB_DGE.R). The spatial deconvolution is in script [3](./Scripts/3_TME_DCV.R).

The two remaining scripts were to build the custom profile matrices: `./Scripts/MK_CSTM_PRF_MTX.R`

And to check for contamination in the epithelial compartment: `./Scripts/2B_TB_DCV.R`
